Create tutorial on option (#1800)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/language/3ds_06_options.md

---
id: options
title: Options
description: >
  Add nothing-as-value to anything to avoid confusion between something and “no such thing“.
category: "Introduction"
---

# Options

## Introduction

An option is a value that wraps another value or nothing, if there isn't anything to wrap. The predefined type `option` is the 
<!-- $MDX non-deterministic=command -->
```ocaml
# #show option;;
type 'a option = None | Some of 'a
```

Here is 42, stored inside an `option` using the data carrying constructor
`Some`:

```ocaml
# Some 42;;
- : int option = Some 42
```

> The `None` constructor means no data is available.

Reviewer: Code example of `None` constructor?

In other words, a value of type `t option` for some type `t` represents
* either a value `v` of type `t`, wrapped as `Some v`

> * no such value, then `o` has the value `None`

Reviewer: Are these referring to some missing code example?

> The option type is very useful when lack of data is better handled as a special value (_i.e.,_ `None`) rather than an exception. It is the type-safe version of returning error values such as in C, for instance. Since no data has any special meaning, confusion between regular values and absence of value is impossible. In computer science, this type is called the [option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The option type is very useful when lack of data is better handled as a special value (_i.e.,_ `None`) rather than an exception. It is the type-safe version of returning error values such as in C, for instance. Since no data has any special meaning, confusion between regular values and the absence of value is impossible. In computer science, this type is called the [option
```

type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type). OCaml has supported `option` since its inception.

## Exceptions _vs_ Options

The function `Sys.getenv : string -> string` from the OCaml standard library
allows us to query the value of an environment variable; however, it throws an exception if the variable is not defined. On the other hand, the function
`Sys.getenv_opt : string -> string option` does the same, except it returns
`None` as the variable is not defined. Here is what may happen if we try to
access an undefined environment variable:
```ocaml
# Sys.getenv "UNDEFINED_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE";;
Exception: Not_found.
# Sys.getenv_opt "UNDEFINED_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE";;
- : string option = None
```

> See the [Error Handling](/docs/error-handling) for an longer discussion on error handling using options, exceptions, and others means.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Error Handling](/docs/error-handling) for a longer discussion on error handling using options, exceptions, and others means.
```

    | None -> [];;
val path : unit -> string list = <fun>
```

This versions calls `fold`.
```ocaml
# let path () = Sys.getenv_opt "PATH" |> fold (String.split_on_char ':') [];;
val path : unit -> string list = <fun>
```

In the standard library, this function is defined using labelled arguments:
```ocaml
# Option.fold;;
- : none:'a -> some:('b -> 'a) -> 'b option -> 'a = <fun>
```

### Unfold an Option

To build a function going the other way round, which creates an `option` one can define `unfold` of type `('a -> bool) -> ('a -> 'b) -> 'a -> 'b option` the following way:
```ocaml
# let unfold p f x =
    if p x then
      Some (f x)
    else
      None;;
val unfold : ('a -> bool) -> ('a -> 'b) -> 'a -> 'b option = <fun>
```

This does not exist in the standard library.

### Bind an Option

The `bind` function of type `'a option -> ('a -> 'b option) -> 'b option` works like `map`. But whilst `map` expects a function-as-parameter `f` that returns an unwrapped value of type `b`, `bind` expects a function-as-parameter `f` that returns a value already wrapped in a option `'b option`.

In other words, `Option.bind` is the same as this:
```ocaml

> # let bind o f = Option.(o |> map f |> join);;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# let bind o f = Option.(o |> map f |> join);;
val bind : 'a option -> ('a -> 'b option) -> 'b option = <fun>
```
